Prof: Okay,
let's start up.
So remember we were talking
about configuration,
about handedness,
which was introduced - the idea
was introduced - in the context
of a tetrahedral carbon.
But you don't need a
tetrahedral carbon in order to
have handedness.
And an example is shown by the
oxidation of a sulfide to a
sulfoxide.
So let's first talk about the
mechanism.
What makes the sulfide reactive
in this case?
What do you see for an orbital
that would make the compound on
the top left?
Russell?
Student:  High HOMO.
Prof: Pardon me?
Prof: High HOMO,
the unshared pair on sulfur.
And how about the peroxy?
Notice that's not a normal
benzoic acid.
It's got two oxygens in a row.
What reactivity does that
confer on it?
Devin, you got an idea,
two oxygens in a row?
What's going to be unusual in
terms of an orbital?
We're looking,
obviously, for a low LUMO.
Student:  It's probably
going to be a higher HOMO.
Prof: Yeah,
it'll have -- it has unshared
pairs, no doubt.
But we want it to react with
the sulfur that has unshared
pairs.
So we're looking for a low LUMO.
Anybody got an idea?
Russell?
Student:
σ*,
between --
Prof: σ* of
the oxygens, because oxygen's
got a big nuclear charge,
right?
So its orbitals are low.
Okay, so we have the unshared
pair on sulfur,
σ* on the oxygen,
and we get one of these where
we make a bond and break a bond
at the same time,
which puts on oxygen onto the
sulfur.
And notice that,
as you said Devin,
the oxygen has unshared pairs,
the n electrons there.
But those won't give
stabilization by mixing with an
unshared pair on sulfur.
But sulfur's in the next row of
the periodic table.
So it has a vacant d
orbital that can overlap with
that.
So you can get partial
stabilization there,
of the unshared pair on oxygen,
which you could denote by
drawing a double bond.
Right?
So we sometimes draw a double
bond to sulfur.
And we can lose the proton from
that, and we get what's called a
sulfoxide.
So there's the mechanism of
making a sulfoxide.
And notice that it's not planar
at the sulfur.
Even though the sulfur has only
three substituents,
it's not planar.
So it's asymmetric.
It's hande;, it's chiral.
Right?
And obviously you could easily
well have reacted the top
unshared pair of the starting
material, as well as the bottom
one.
So when you do the reaction you
get a racemate,
a 50:50 mixture of the
sulfoxides.
Okay, now we mentioned
omeprazole last time.
Here's the chemical structure
of omeprazole.
What will make it reactive?
Anybody got a hint for what
might make it reactive?
Elizabeth?
Student:  A lone pair on
nitrogen.
Prof: It's got a lone
pair on two nitrogens.
Student:  Right.
Prof: Right? Okay.
Now one way to discriminate
between them is to protonate one
of them.
Right?
Because when you do that,
you now have this
carbon-nitrogen double bond.
Right?
And the π* will be
unusually low because of the
positive charge that came from
the proton.
So acid is the stuff that's
going to activate this.
So now you've got a low LUMO
and also the high HOMO,
from the other unshared pair on
nitrogen.
So bingo, you can add,
just as the nitrogen would add
to a C=O double bond,
like that.
Then you get this thing with
now four bonds to that central
carbon.
Protonate again,
and now this compound has two
positive charges.
That's not so great,
to have a dication.
So you get rid of it.
You can get rid of it by losing
that original proton.
But there's another proton you
can lose, just as easily,
in this way.
Right?
So lose the proton on the
nitrogen and then have those
electrons re-form the double
bond to carbon,
and the electrons go out on
sulfur,
and you get this thing.
Now, that happens -- remember
it's the acid coming along;
the H+^( )is what caused this
to happen to omeprazole.
So if you have a pH,
an acid pH between one and
three, omeprazole will undergo
this acid-catalyzed
rearrangement,
with a half-life of two
minutes.
So in no time at all it's
converted to this form,
which is the active form.
Now active to what?
Well suppose you have an enzyme
that has a sulfur on it,
that's got an unshared pair of
electrons, that will make it
reactive.
What will make the drug,
in this form,
reactive?
Anybody got an idea?
Russell, I'm going to go to you
again, because you answered the
same question before.
We just made this group here.
Student:  Yes,
that's right.
Prof: What's going to
make it reactive?
Student:  π*
makes it --
Prof: Not π*,
no.
Student:
>.
Prof: It's the same as
O-O, right?
Sulfur is right below oxygen.
Student:  I meant to say
σ*,
Prof: Can you see that?
So it's σ*.
Oh, that's what you meant to
say.
Student:  Yeah..
Prof: σ*
S-O.
Okay, so we got that low LUMO
and the high HOMO on the sulfur
coming in.
So we can do exactly the same
reaction as before,
right?
Make a bond, break a bond.
OH- goes away.
Right?
And we have this thing where
we've now formed a covalent bond
with the enzyme.
So the enzyme can't do its
stuff anymore,
right?
Because it's tied up.
Okay?
So the pump,
the pump which takes acid
that's made in the cells that
line the stomach and transports
the acid into the stomach,
doesn't work anymore,
because that enzyme is what did
the trick.
So the pump enzyme is
inactivated and the flow of HCl
to the stomach is stopped.
Okay?
And, in fact,
this is an interesting problem
in the design of the drug,
because it's acid that causes
this to happen,
in two minutes,
to become the active form.
But you don't want it to happen
until it gets into the cells
that line the stomach.
So you take the pill orally,
it goes into the stomach.
What problem are you suffering
from, when you put the -- when
you take this pill?
Student: Acid.
Prof: Acid,
in your stomach.
So bingo, it's going to happen
in the stomach,
not in the cells in the wall of
the stomach.
So they have to coat it with
something that'll make it get
through the stomach first
without doing its reaction,
and so they say don't grind the
pill up --
right?
-- before you take it.
Let it get through.
Then it gets through the liver,
into the bloodstream,
and comes back to the wall of
these cells in the stomach,
and then it gets activated by
acid and does this trick and
stops the acid from pumping into
the stomach.
So that's the idea.
Okay, now should a chiral
switch, to a single enantiomer
-- omeprazole,
Prilosec, is a racemate,
it's a 50:50 mixture of the
enantiomers;
enantiomers,
remember, at sulfur,
not at carbon.
Okay?
Now, if you go to a single
enantiomer, will the drug be
twice as good,
or at least better?
Can anybody see a problem that
you would have?
Right?
When something interacts with
an enzyme, the enzyme is a
single hand.
So the complex,
the reacting complex,
between the enzyme and the
stuff that you're reacting,
is diastereomeric if that stuff
is handed;
if it's right or left-handed.
The enzyme say is all
right-handed.
So you have right-right,
or right-left.
One of them will be better than
the other.
Right?
So is that going to be
something that'll be important
here?
If we make a single enantiomer
of omeprazole -- remember,
we talked about thalidomide,
ibuprofen before.
Will a single enantiomer likely
help?
There's an interesting
observation about this compound,
the active form,
that makes it different from
the original omeprazole.
Do you see what it is?
Incidentally,
notice, that's the original
omeprazole.
All that that mechanism I
showed you did was to change
that bond from there to there,
and the proton from nitrogen to
sulfur.
Let's go back again.
That's all that happened during
the activation.
But it did something crucial
with respect to stereochemistry.
How about that original form?
Was it chiral?
Student:  Yes.
Prof: Why? Angela?
What made it chiral? Yeah?
Student:  The bond is
going -- like it can either go
inside or outside.
Prof: Right.
The bond -- the oxygen on the
sulfur could be either going in
or out;
the sulfur is pyramidal.
What happened when we activated
it?
Student:  It gets bigger.
Prof: Now it's not
chiral anymore.
So this thing is not going to
discriminate between anything,
because it's not chiral
anymore.
Okay?
So this thing is achiral.
So it shouldn't make any
difference which hand you're
using at this stage.
Now, so there's no difference
after omeprazole has been
activated by acid.
Notice it's not activated by an
enzyme,
because if it were activated by
an enzyme,
then it could discriminate
between the two hands and one
would be more activated than the
other.
Right?
So that could be a difference.
But that's not true.
It's just acid that does the
activation and makes it achiral.
So at first glance one would
think it'd make no difference at
all.
Still, it could be that one
enantiomer is better at getting
through the digestive system and
getting back to the stomach,
in order to do the trick.
So it's still possible.
How could you tell whether it's
better or not?
This is getting pretty
complicated -- right?
-- all the different things it
would go through to get from
here to there.
How would you find out whether
it's worth using a single
enantiomer?
What would you do?
Student:  Test it.
Prof: Test it. How?
Student:  Clinical trial.
Prof: You'd do a
clinical trial.
Okay.
So you need -- but in order to
do that, you need a single
enantiomer in order to do the
laboratory and the clinical
testing.
And we're going to talk about
that in just a second.
But first let's talk just a bit
about the economics of this.
These things called proton pump
inhibitors are the newest
generation of things to treat
acid reflux.
And here's data from Wellmark,
which is the Blue Cross/Blue
Shield of Iowa and South Dakota;
so a pretty small population
area.
And this is how many
prescriptions they wrote for
Prilosec in the period from 1999
to 2003;
just went up by 250% to a
quarter of a million.
And if you go world -- so 15%
of the members of Wellmark got
this stuff, as of 2003;
and 600 million worldwide.
That's a big market. Right?
So now here's cost comparison
for things that treat acid
stomach.
So the first stuff is Tums and
Rolaids and so on.
Those cost three or four cents
apiece.
Okay, then there are these
over-the-counter H_2 blockers,
like Zantac,
which are now very cheap;
like thirty-seven cents.
But they didn't used to be,
because they used to be covered
by patent, and were prescription
drugs.
Okay.
Then there are prescription
versions you see of these H_2
blockers, and Zantac,
when it's for prescription,
costs $4.27 apiece.
Okay, but now these proton pump
inhibitors come along.
And in 1988 Prilosec came on
the market at $4.61 a pop.
You take one every day. Okay?
But in 2002 the patent ran out.
So now generic people started
selling the generic version of
omeprazole for $2.76,
and AstraZeneca,
the manufacturer of Prilosec,
said we can do better than that;
we've been making this stuff
for years, so we'll make an OTC
version and have Proctor &
Gamble sell it.
And so in 2003 they introduced
Prilosec OTC;
which was actually exactly the
same stuff but seventy-nine
cents a pill.
Right?
But you can still get the
prescription form,
if you want the real thing,
for $4.61 a pill.
Okay, but so now you're losing
a big market.
If your pills are costing only
something like what?;
1/6th or 1/7th of what they
originally cost.
So in 2000, AstraZeneca
introduced Nexium,
which is a single enantiomer.
Okay?
And now that's $4.87 a pill.
Right?
And that process,
to go from the R/S to
the S,
to go from the racemate to a
single enantiomer,
is called a "chiral
switch",
in the industry;
to go from a racemate to a
single enantiomer.
Okay.
Now this was touted,
within AstraZeneca,
as the most successful U.S.
launch ever.
And here you can see the graph
of how much better it is than
Viagra, Vioxx,
Lipitor, Celebrex and so on.
Over this little more than
three-year period it went up to
eight billion dollars in sales.
Okay?
And you can see that there's
been a lot of integration of
clinical and commercial
enterprise at AstraZeneca.
This is from a website that you
can see there.
In December 2003 they say:
"…the executive
director and development brand
leader" (at AstraZeneca)
"adds the clinical and
scientific proficiency as a
research gastroenterologist.
As Levine and his staff put
together clinical development
plans,
such as additional indications
or line extensions,
they get commercial input at
every stage."
Well I don't know if you
noticed I drink water every once
awhile because my mouth is dry.
And just before -- when I
learned that the class was going
to be filmed this year,
I realized that I'd been
suffering from hoarseness since
last spring,
and I figured that wouldn't be
good for the recording.
So I went to see a doctor to
find out if I could do anything
about this, whether there was
anything wrong.
Now there's something you can
do for this, and Nexium has been
the most intensively advertised
stuff ever.
Right? That was for the public.
This is for doctors.
Okay?
So if you go to that website,
you can see a seven-part,
seven-scene description of why
Nexium is so much better than
anything else.
And what I'd like you to do for
a homework problem for Wednesday
is to go through that show and
evaluate whether this series
shows that Nexium is superior or
not.
Is it worth paying five times
as much for a pill,
or six times as much for a
pill?
Now, this is the FDA-approved
label for Nexium.
And so they did clinical
trials, just as we said they
should do.
Okay, so here they tried to
heal erosive esophagitis.
So what they tested,
you can see,
is the healing rate for this
condition,
from 40 mg of Nexium,
20 mg of Nexium --
so that's the single enantiomer
in two different doses --
or the traditional omeprazole,
the racemic stuff.
So, "These were evaluated
in patients with endoscopically
diagnosed erosive esophagitis in
four multicenter,
double-blind,
randomized studies.
The healing rates after 4 and 8
weeks were evaluated and shown
in the table below."
Now suppose you were in charge
of designing this test.
How much of the racemate,
omeprazole --
so 40 mg and 20 mg of Nexium --
but compared to omeprazole,
how much would you have
administered to compare with --
so there are the single
enantiomer,
40 mg or 20 mg.
How much omeprazole would you
use?
Student:  Forty and
twenty.
Prof: And why?
Lucas, what do you say?
Student:  20 mg,
as little as possible.
Prof:
>
Why?
Student:  To show the
best distinction between the new
stuff and the old stuff.
Prof: Okay.
Does everybody agree with
Lucas?
Kate, what would you choose?
Student:  Well I'd want
to do both twenty and forty.
But it looks like there's only
one omeprazole.
Prof: Okay,
but if you were designing the
test, you'd do twenty and forty.
We'll have an auction here.
Do I hear eighty from anyone?
Rick you --
Student:  I would do
eighty and forty.
Prof: eighty and forty.
Why?
Student:  Because that
way -- because so omeprazole is
a racemate.
If you do eighty and forty of
those, you would get forty and
twenty of the active form.
Prof: Okay.
Does everybody see what Rick's
saying?
If you want the same amount of
what is ostensibly the active
stuff, you should have double
the amount of omeprazole.
Now this is what the label
says, what was actually used;
20 mg.
You win Lucas.
Okay? Now why?
It's because that's the
approved dose for that disease.
Right?
That's what the FDA approved,
right?
But we'll give twice or four
times as much of what we think
to be the active ingredient to
the other people in the test.
Okay, so that's the test.
There were four different
tests, and this shows it.
But let's summarize it with a
graph that'll show it I think
more clearly.
So after four weeks and after
eight weeks, these are what
fraction of healing there was
with the racemate,
which is shown in open figures.
And the shapes are different
studies;
remember, there were four
different studies.
And this is what you get if you
use the single enantiomer,
is 20 mg;
which remember is twice the
dose, if that one form is
active.
What would you conclude from
this?
Is it worth paying seven times
as much, or six times as much?
Student:  No.
Prof: Okay now -- or you
could use 40 mg.
Now I think we would probably
agree that it's better,
just eyeballing this thing,
even if we aren't
statisticians.
Okay?
So four times the dose does a
better job.
Now, then this was heavily
advertised.
You may have seen these things
for the purple pill.
So you get this grey-haired guy
here who says,
"If I told you
prescription Nexium heals acid
reflux damage better,
you'd want proof.
And now your doctor has that
proof.
Recent medical studies prove
Nexium heals better than the
other leading prescription
medicine."
(Now notice,
he says prescription medicine.
The OTC stuff isn't a
prescription medicine.
So this is a different test.)
"No wonder they call
Nexium the healing purple pill.
So call your doctor today,
because if left untreated the
damage could get worse."
So you can get a purple pill
there.
Okay, this is the test he was
referring to,
which compared esomeprazole,
that's Nexium,
to lansoprazole.
But again it's 40 mg versus 30
mg.
I don't know anything about
lansoprazole,
but that's what they tested
anyhow.
But notice incidentally,
in the acknowledgements,
this study was supported by a
grant from AstraZeneca,
Wayne, Pennsylvania.
So these are not completely
disinterested people,
at least some of them,
who are involved in this study.
And it says,
"So call your doctor today
to learn about this."
And fortunately we have my
doctor here, Dr. Duffey.
So she's going to give you her
perspective
>
on Nexium and omeprazole.
Thank you for coming.
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
My pleasure Professor
McBride.
Thank you for having me.
<<Technical
adjustments>>
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
Well I can remember
sitting in organic chemistry
classe as a pre-med,
wondering why it was I needed
to learn how to make paint.
So this is a real treat for me
to be here today,
to be able to talk to you about
some clinical aspects of why
it's important to study and do
well in Professor McBride's
class.
Sorry.
All right, so I'm a
otolaryngologist,
I'm an ear, nose and throat
physician, and I work here at
Yale.
Some of you may recognize me
from the health plan.
And Professor McBride did give
me permission today to talk a
little bit about his case.
So I'm not going to show you
any confidential pictures,
but I may allude to him here in
the talk.
So first of all the disclosure.
I don't have any financial
interest in any of the drugs or
companies discussed today.
I'm not on any speakers'
bureaus.
So, in a word,
I don't really have a vested
interest in anything shown here
today.
But I will discuss some
off-label or experimental uses
of these compounds.
And the opinions presented by
me are mine and no one else's.
So as you've heard testified
here today, Professor McBride
took Prilosec and actually did
improve.
So he sent me an email and was
very excited that I could come
and speak to you all today,
and said, "By the way,
my symptoms were improved."
So Prilosec fixes symptoms of
GE reflux disease,
gastroesophageal reflux
disease, and laryngopharyngeal
reflux disease,
which is the entity that I
treat.
GE reflux disease is in the
domain primarily of the
gastroenterologist.
So I'm going to refer mostly to
LPR today, laryngopharyngeal
reflux.
So we've heard that Prilosec
works.
Or does it?
We really need to know.
How is it we know these drugs
work?
Someone talked about clinical
trials today,
and I'm going to focus a little
bit more closely on that,
because that's -- we rely on
these,
and they come primarily from
pharma.
Yale University,
my clinic, doesn't really have
the money to run extensive
clinical trials on my patients.
Sometimes some centers are able
to do it, or you may have a
grant to do something that looks
at a drug.
But primarily we're relying on
what the pharmaceutical
companies tell us in terms of
data.
So about Prilosec working in
him, all we know is that his
symptoms are improved --
they were in his body -- eating
his diet,
and living his life,
and taking the drug at the
prescribed dose.
But there are a lot of
variables that we may not know
about,
and some of these variables are
what the pharma companies need
to take into account,
when they're doing these
clinical trials,
when they're designing them.
Are we taking other patient
variables into account?
For example, diet;
does he take a large number of
herbal supplements we don't know
about, for example?
This could affect the
pharmacodynamics.
It could affect the
pharmacokinetics of the drug in
his body.
Did he take the prescribed
medication on an empty stomach,
as it's supposed to be taken,
so that the acid will activate
it early?
In other words,
was he compliant?
And these are all things that I
need to be taking into account
when I prescribe a drug to a
patient.
For example,
these studies were done in
patient populations,
but they may have been done on
the West Coast,
they may have been done in
China.
Is that patient population
representative of my patient
population?
So when they're designing these
trials, they try to control for
as many patient individual
variables as possible.
In addition,
these studies have to be
statistically sound,
because biostatistics drive
these clinical trials and their
design,
so that if differences are
actually observed between
Prilosec and a placebo,
or Prilosec versus
esomeprazole,
we have to be able to determine
with reasonable certainty if
these differences are real or if
they're due to just chance
alone.
So that's where biostatistics
comes in.
And I submit -- and I think
Professor McBride,
who helped write some of these
slides,
probably also feels -- that
there is some duty on the part,
not only of the manufacturers,
but of academic institutions,
who are also running their own
clinical trials,
to actually design the studies
so that it's easy to understand;
the data are there and they're
very clear, so that they can
make also very legitimate
head-to-head marketing
comparisons between competitor
compounds.
So I think this is very
important.
As a physician,
I feel that I have a duty to
really evaluate the literature
critically.
Sometimes I actually need to go
back and pull the studies.
I can look at the package
insert, for these drugs,
but how do I know -- how can I
actually believe it?
So sometimes I actually go back
and I'll pull the study off
PubMed, and read it.
And we have to be able to
ascertain the validity of the
research that supports our
choices as clinicians.
There's a lot of marketing out
there;
as we heard,
there's a lot of money to be
made off these compounds.
And I think I'm going to also
propose today that we as a
society,
we as patients,
we as members of the society,
perhaps a society who may one
day have a single-payer
healthcare system,
we need to be educated also.
And this information's
available.
It's available on the web.
You've already seen some of it
from Professor McBride this
morning.
This website is a fantastic
resource.
If you have a question about
any medication you're taking,
you want to look at the
chemical compound of it,
the chemical structure and how
they designed it,
how they make it,
how it's marketed,
how it's distributed,
all this is available on the
website.
So you can just plug in the
drug that you're taking,
or the drug of interest,
and that information's all
there.
It's public domain.
So use that as a resource.
But direct-to-patient marketing
can be really effective.
And this is also referred to as
direct-to-consumer marketing.
You saw some of it in the
earlier slides,
but all you have to do is turn
on the evening news,
and these ads are there,
right?
Every time there's a commercial
break, you see some happy person
walking around,
talking about this drug.
And you just hear the drug name.
You don't hear anything more
about it.
You may not hear anything about
the studies.
But it can be very effective.
So I think we need to look
critically at some of the
claims, and we need to think,
is this really actually the
right thing for me to be taking?
So my specialty -- so back to
our clinical model -- my
specialty is otolaryngology.
I'm focusing on the larynx with
laryngopharangeal reflux.
The larynx is the voice box.
It's where your vocal cords are.
It's what we use when we're
speaking.
Ear, nose and throat is another
name for my specialty.
But we're talking about
laryngopharangeal reflux,
which is reflux,
acid reflux,
that primarily affects the
voice box.
It's under-diagnosed.
It's also a significant source
of morbidity and decreased
quality of life --
hoarseness, feeling like you
have a frog in your throat,
sore throat -- and it's
frequently associated with other
forms of reflux disease,
like GE reflux disease,
gastroesophageal reflux
disease.
So it's a significant public
health problem.
And this is a very busy slide,
but just to point out some
statistics: that up to 10% of
patients who present to the ENT
practice,
for any reason,
may actually have symptoms or
findings related to LPR,
laryngopharyngeal reflux.
It's also increasingly
recognized as a problem that can
be associated with non-allergic
asthma,
and a great number of these
patients also present with a
history of acid reflux from
other --
where their symptoms are coming
from other sources,
such as the esophagus,
for example.
So reflux is a very big problem.
I see a lot of patients.
It's estimated that up to 40%
of the adult population in this
country may have reflux;
and some studies say even more.
So there's a lot of money to be
made.
What is its treatment?
In the year 2008,
what we're doing is we're
treating this with proton pump
inhibitors.
But I have to also put in a
disclaimer that there was a
recent meta-analysis,
within the last couple of
years, looking critically at the
literature,
and at a number of different
studies.
It evaluated about ten
different studies,
and there is also a significant
placebo effect here.
So the jury's not completely
out, but there are plenty of
studies, in my literature,
that support it to use for the
treatment of LPR.
I'm not going to go into all
that today.
But the reality is that PPIs
are FDA approved.
They're out there.
They're easy to get.
All you have to do practically
is ask your physician for a
prescription.
So what are we trying to target?
Here is a reasonably
good-looking larynx.
So these are the vocal cords.
This is the anterior portion.
This is the posterior portion,
back where your esophagus is,
and there's left and right.
So this is what I see when I'm
looking with a scope.
I pass it very carefully
through the nose and we get a
very nice look at the larynx.
And this is a patient with
moderately severe
laryngopharyngeal reflux.
You can see that there's a lot
of swelling here,
compared to these other
pictures.
This area back here is all
beefed up, and this area down
here also looks quite reddened.
So this is what we're treating
with these proton pump
inhibitors.
And we're hoping to take a
patient that looks like this,
and turn their larynx into
something more that looks like
this normal larynx.
You can see the sharpened edges
here.
So data is out there.
We can follow this clinically,
and that's usually what we do.
So another reality,
when you're considering these
drugs that are being developed,
as we're hearing about today,
and being prescribed,
is that really only about one
in a 1000 of these compounds
that enter preclinical testing
will actually make it to human
testing,
what we call clinical trials.
And out of these only about a
fifth may actually be deemed
safe and effective enough by the
FDA to gain FDA approval.
FDA approval is the Holy Grail
for a pharmaceutical company
interested in developing drugs
and getting these drugs on the
market.
Without FDA approval they can't
market the drug.
put out ads on the evening news.
So this is an example of one of
those documents that's available
on the website that I showed
you.
And this is the approval letter
for Prilosec OTC,
which came out in 2003.
It was written to Proctor and
Gamble by the FDA.
And I just want to point out
this area down here.
This is an approval letter for
this drug, given at this dose,
used for this indication.
So they're very, very specific.
The drug companies can't --
they're not allowed to market
its use for other indications.
But this is really,
really important information
for the company in order to be
able to put this out and
actually start to see some
return on their investment for
research and development.
So again I just want to point
out, this is for omeprazole
twenty mg, for the treatment of
frequent heartburn.
Now here's some information
that -- you saw a different form
of this earlier.
Esomeprazole also has approval
by the FDA for a number of
different indications,
but also for the treatment of
GE reflux disease.
And what I want to point out
here is that in the design of
these clinical trials they look
very carefully,
strategically,
at how can we show that our
drug is better than the
competitor's?
So clinical trials,
when they're designing these,
are generally broken down into
three phrases:
phase I, II and III.
We have phase IV,
which usually occurs after the
FDA has given approval for a
compound.
Phase I is used in healthy
volunteers.
The endpoint is really safety.
They want to know what are the
side-effects.
Is this a drug that we can
actually give to the public?
And they also use a lot of
studies to determine metabolism
and excretion of the drug at
this point in development.
And these are usually smaller
studies, and they usually only
need anywhere from twenty to 100
patients for these.
And then once they pass into
phase I -- oh sorry,
let me say just a little bit
about safety.
Some of the side-effects -- in
the industry they call these
adverse events.
This is a terminology that the
FDA uses as well,
and it really is just something
to mean a side-effect.
Somebody had something that was
out of the ordinary and they
happened to be taking the drug.
So you have to at least
consider that it may have been
considered by the -- it may have
been caused by the drug.
A serious adverse event
would've led to some sort of
damage to the patient,
or extended care such as
hospitalization or a surgery.
And these AEs,
adverse events,
need to be reported to the FDA
during the clinical trials.
So they're watched very
carefully, and they can't
proceed through to the next
phase of clinical studies if
there are too many adverse
events or, for example,
if they have deaths;
those usually tend to raise
really big red flags.
And again, all this
information's available on that
FDA website.
So if you want to see how a
drug was developed and what
adverse events occurred during
its development,
you can see that there,
for the most part.
There's a lot of internal stuff
that's not going to be on there,
but for the most part they have
to report these AEs to the FDA
as they're going along.
In phase II they're looking for
effectiveness or efficacy.
The preliminary data generated
generally is for effectiveness
of the compound for a particular
disease or a condition.
So this is where we start to
get into specifics about which
dose of omeprazole am I going to
choose if I'm going to compare
this to esomeprazole?
They can compare it also to
placebo.
They can compare it to a
different drug.
And again they're looking at
adverse events,
they're looking at safety,
but they're also starting to
now look, am I actually
targeting the disease?
The study sizes are usually
bigger.
And then finally,
if it gets past phase II,
you can get to phase III.
And if anybody watches the
stock market,
looking at drug companies or
biotech companies,
phase III is where things
really -- you'll hear about
this.
When Wall Street hears a
whisper that a drug's not going
to make it through phase III
studies,
or it may not get FDA approval,
you can tank the price of the
stock.
It's really quite remarkable to
watch, as a clinician.
Because again I don't really
have any vested interest in any
particular company,
but I just find it fascinating
that even just a suggestion will
actually impact things
economically,
so importantly.
So here again we continue to
look at safety and
effectiveness.
We may study different patient
populations.
They may look abroad to do some
of these studies.
India is a place where a lot of
studies are being done these
days - Eastern Europe as well.
They may look at different
dosages, and they may combine
this with other drugs.
These are usually very large
studies.
By this time they've gotten to
-- they want to see clinical
differences that are so subtle
that they have to have very
large numbers of patients to
make this statistically sound.
So they cost -- these studies
cost millions and millions of
dollars too.
So these companies are very,
very invested.
They want to make sure that
they get return on their
investment.
And then phase IV occurs after
the FDA has approved a drug.
These are post-marketing study
commitments,
and these are commitments by
the sponsor,
the person actually doing the
studies and marketing the drug
and selling it,
that they will provide
additional information to the
FDA about the product safety,
efficacy or perhaps its optimal
use.
And more recently we're hearing
about phase zero trials in the
cancer research literature --
my area of research is in
cancer --
and phase zero trials are
exploratory, first-in-human
trials.
So these are designed to speed
up development of promising
agents.
As we know, cancer is a very
big problem in this country,
especially with the population
aging, and it can kill very
quickly.
So these trials are designed to
establish very early on whether
an agent behaves in human
subjects differently than it was
expected from the pre-clinical
studies.
And that does happen sometimes.
So you can imagine if you spent
months and months planning a
phase I trial,
only to find out,
when you put it into humans,
that it reacts -- it doesn't
behave the way you expected,
based on how it looked in mice,
you can lose a lot of money and
you lose a lot of momentum.
So these phase zero trials are
being put more and more into
play.
So back to our clinical model.
So some of the studies that we
already heard about from
Professor McBride were to
determine whether these drugs
actually worked in patients with
reflux or not.
So, and I'm not showing all the
studies, by the way.
I just have to disclose that.
I'm only showing you a few
studies,
just to demonstrate what type
of data I have to actually take
into consideration,
as a clinician,
when I'm looking critically at
how the studies were done;
whether I think the drug's
actually going to be helpful for
my patient or not.
So this was in a group of
patients, a particular patient
population, with already
established erosive esophagitis;
sounds pretty bad.
It's pretty uncomfortable.
They studied these patients
with esomeprazole and
omeprazole, at similar doses,
with similar numbers of
patients in both arms.
They found no statistically
significant difference in the
symptoms of heartburn,
sustained resolution of
heartburn symptoms in this group
of patients.
Now if you read the
esomeprazole package insert,
they state that they chose
omeprazole twenty as the
competitor dose,
because it's the FDA approved
dose for this indication;
which it is.
So then I went to the Prilosec
package insert to find that they
did look at 40 mg when they were
looking at these types of
symptoms.
They found that there was
really no improve -- no benefit
to using the higher dose.
So they went with the lower
dose when they went for FDA
approval.
So that's, I think,
partly why they chose 20 mg.
And then also,
if you look more closely,
there's also they lose some
linearity between plasma
concentration versus areas under
the curve,
which is plasma concentration
in the patient over time.
So it becomes less and less
predictable, as you go up on the
dose, how much drug is actually
being seen physiologically for
the patient.
So once they get out of that
predictable linearity,
things become a little bit
iffy, and you could potentially
get into adverse effects.
So I think that's part of the
logic for why they chose that.
But again, I'm not trying to
make an exhaustive argument for
what should've been done or
against what was done;
just to give you some idea for
what we have to deal with as
clinicians.
So then finally these are some
of the three studies that
Professor McBride has already
alluded to, showing that there
are variable results.
This one showed a definite
statistically significant
improvement in healing of
erosive esophagitis for
esomeprazole over --
any dose of esomeprazole over
omeprazole.
But two other studies actually
showed that there was no
difference.
So there's another bigger study
as well that's not included
here.
Prof: Actually it's the
next one.
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
Oh I'm sorry,
yeah there it is,
okay.
Yeah, so again you just kind of
have to look at the literature
and say okay,
I'm convinced or I'm not
convinced.
I don't know that there's any
right or wrong.
But the FDA also has a role to
play here,
and they really vet these
studies quite well,
and they're not allowed to
market if they don't feel that
--
if the FDA doesn't feel that
there's sufficient evidence
there to support it.
So in my patient population,
who have LPR,
a large number of these
patients have heartburn.
They may or may not be treated
for the heartburn already.
I may be the first physician
they see, and I may say,
"Well do you also have
heartburn symptoms?"
Those would be GE reflux type
of symptoms.
So I can end up treating both
of those if I put my patient on
one of these PPIs for
laryngopharyngeal reflux.
So if I've just told you that
these drugs are approved for a
specific indication,
maybe at a specific dose,
how is it I'm able to use it
for something that it's not
really even approved for?
And this is where we get into
off-label use of drugs.
So once a drug is approved by
the FDA for any indication,
I as a clinician can write it,
as a prescription,
for another indication.
But the FDA has put out these
guidelines,
such that good medical practice
and the best interests of the
patient should prevail here,
so that we're using legally
available drugs --
it's an important term --
according to the --
and devices -- according to my
best knowledge and judgment as a
clinician.
If we use a product for an
indication that's not in the
approved labeling,
I have the responsibility to be
well-informed about the product,
to base its use on firm
scientific rationale,
and on sound medical evidence.
Now in my literature there's a
lot of sound medical evidence
supporting the use for PPIs in
laryngopharyngeal reflux.
But I just also --
Prof: Can I ask you a
question about that?
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
Yeah.
Prof: You say you have a
--
it's not underlined there but
you say there's a responsibility
to maintain records of the
product's use and effects.
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
Uh-hum.
Prof: Does anyone come
around and collect those records
and try to make something of
them?
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
I've never been contacted
by anybody.
Prof: Are people pretty
conscientious about doing that?
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
I think that we're
conscientious about recording
whether there've been
side-effects at the given dose.
We're conscientious about
recording whether there's been
improvement in the symptoms.
But I don't have a detailed
questionnaire,
in general.
So --
Prof: Yeah.
Because one would think that
this would be sort of like a
wiki,
that even though you can't
afford to do a big study,
that if you collect enough
observations from enough people,
you could make something out of
it.
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
We could,
we could.
But then you're in to
experimenting,
if you're doing it with the
intention of actually showing or
disproving a hypothesis.
Prof: Well but you said
you have a responsibility to
maintain the records.
Why?
>
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
We do.
No, I agree with that.
I agree.
But we're not really obligated
to submit it to an IRB.
If we were doing it with the
intention of definitely showing
a difference one way or another,
then that would be considered
an experiment.
So I would be obligated to run
that through the institutional
review board,
which is there for the
protection of human subjects,
and to make sure that any
studies that we're designing are
legitimate,
that they're ethical,
that the patient has been given
the opportunity to ask
questions.
They can refuse,
they can drop out of the study.
So, but they're all important
issues that I think would be in
the realm of,
at that point,
doing actual experimentation.
But it's a really important --
it's an important point.
But we can use these drugs for
off-label marketed uses.
Now the drug companies
importantly are not allowed to
market;
they're not allowed to
advertise for off-label uses of
compounds.
So again I have a duty,
as a physician,
to evaluate this literature
critically and to really be able
to validate or ascertain the
validity of the research that
supports my choices.
So just a very quick word about
marketing.
As I mentioned,
my research area is in
oncology.
I've been involved in some
clinical trials with oncologic
drugs for head and neck cancer.
And I get these emails all the
time.
Marketing is a really big deal
when it comes to these
compounds.
Just to give you an idea,
this one in particular is about
how do you market your oncology
products?
And this is an actual meeting,
to which I was invited.
And one of the teasers here is
that "in such a crowded and
competitive market,
the ability to differentiate
your product has never been more
important."
So this just gives you some
idea of what the thought process
is and what the general culture
is.
And this is again a wordy
slide, but just to point out --
and this comes from Nature
News;
it's fairly recent -- that
industry is really starting
shift attention now to other
areas.
So cardiovascular drugs,
which cardiovascular disease is
really the foremost killer in
our country right now,
but they're really shifting
their attention now to drugs
where perhaps they can make
another blockbuster drug;
and that's usually always what
the impetus is,
return on investment.
So oncology drugs;
immunology, which would be
something for rheumatoid
arthritis, for example;
and neurology are going to be a
very, very big focus of
attention of pharma industry.
So as you watch the evening
news, or whichever channel you
might be tuning into,
you'll be hearing a lot more
about this,
and I think a lot more direct
to patient marketing is going to
take place.
So again, this has been a lot
of fun for me to participate,
and I thank Professor McBride
also for stimulating me to think
a little bit more deeply about
proton pump inhibitors and how I
use them.
Prof: Great. Thank you.
>
Prof: Leave it on,
there might be some questions.
Are there some questions for
Dr. Duffey?
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
I'd be happy to try to
field any questions,
as long as they're not too
hard.
Yeah?
Student:  I am an
international student,
and I have noticed in the
marketing for drugs that they
have on television here that
they always give the full,
like two paragraphs about the
side-effects of the drugs,
on television.
Is that required, and why?
How is that regulated?
Prof: Right,
so the question is from -- you
said you're an international
student?
Student:  Yeah.
Prof: She's from
Australia.
Student:  I'm not used
to that at all.
So it's sort of like whoa.
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
Right.
So she's noted when these ads
come on TV that there's a very
long disclaimer afterwards about
the side-effects.
And I'm not actually an expert
on how the marketing of these
drugs is done.
I'm going to speculate here,
but I'm pretty confident that
this is correct,
that the FDA mandates that they
put that out there.
So if you're going to make a
claim about a compound and how
great it is, you also better
tell the other side of the
story.
You better tell them,
"Listen,
we might fix your reflux but
you're going to get
diarrhea."
You know?
And it's kind of funny
actually, because if you look at
these and you say,
"Okay, I'm going to take
that drug to fix my runny nose,
but I'm going to get diarrhea
and muscle pains and all these
other things."
So it really -- I think it's
probably mandated by the FDA,
and the FCC also may have
something to do with that.
But that would be my
speculation.
Yes?
Prof: Sam?
Student:  I was
wondering what your opinion is
about -- I know recently one of
the big things was like that
Vioxx isn't safe.
Do you think that clinical
trials, they should do longer
term studies?
Because I think -- I don't know
of other specific examples,
but a lot of drugs like it
comes through after a long time,
long-term use problems --
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
Right, and then we wonder
as consumers,
is this safe?
If I'm going to keep taking
this drug for years and years,
am I safe, or are my progeny
going to be safe?
It's a good question.
And that's where some of these
phase IV studies -- they're
called post-marketing studies --
come in.
I was involved with one
clinical trial where a phase IV
study actually was mandated.
And so for years afterwards
that drug company had to
continue to pour resources into
contacting patients who had
taken the drug --
"Are you still taking it?
If you're still taking it,
what side-effects are you
having?"
So those are mandated on some
level.
And the FDA really plays the
key role there.
And that's been my experience.
But it definitely raises
questions.
And the Vioxx trial just was
devastating for Merck.
And I think a lot -- they
didn't see a lot of that coming.
So I think for the pharma
companies -- correct me if I'm
wrong;
you may have more insights --
it's probably,
it's a decision that they have
to weigh.
How much resources are they
going to continue to pour in?
And that would,
on paper, it would take away
from their profits.
So I'm sure there's a lot of
internal debate about it.
But yeah, that's where we're
thankful that we have the FDA
looking out.
A lot of countries don't have
an organization such as the FDA.
You can market anything you
want, for almost any indication,
and whatever dose goes.
So I think we're very fortunate
in that respect.
I'm going to turn the mike over.
Prof: Well Dana's got a
question.
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
Oh sorry,
I'm sorry.
Student:  I've heard
there can be cases where a drug
was actually more effective for
a certain off-label use than the
use that it's actually FDA
approved for,
but it's been FDA approved for
something that has a bigger
patient population,
so you can potentially make
more money.
If off-label uses can't be
advertised, how do you as
doctors find out about that and
evaluate that?
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
So the question is if an
off-label use for a drug can't
be advertised by the company,
how do I as a physician hear
about it?
I would hear about it from
other clinical trials that were
done, maybe have -- may have
been supported by the company;
so as we saw an example of
earlier.
But I look for literature
within my field.
So laryngopharyngeal reflux is
a perfect example of that.
It works pretty well,
for this drug,
but you do have to take it for
a longer time period,
and sometimes you actually have
to take it for higher doses than
is recommended for GE reflux
alone.
But it works pretty well,
and I hear patients all the
time say that it works.
I have other patients who say
it doesn't work.
So yeah, we just have to look
at our own literature.
And there are smaller studies;
they may have fifty,
seventy patients.
But in an academic institution,
somebody who,
with an interest in that
particular area,
may run their own study,
because they want that
information and the
information's not out there.
So we look for good solid data
to help guide our choices that
way.
Prof: Kevin?
Student:  As a
physician, about off-label use,
do you ever use drugs in an
off-label use and take advantage
of their side-effects,
in that sense?
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
Okay.
I'll give you -- well yeah
there was.
So when -- I don't,
I don't really have any drugs
that I use that for.
But there's one drug in my
field;
Botox, for example.
Botox was being used to help
weaken the vocal cords.
Okay?
It's been used for that for
years, in patients who have
speech problems and don't have
good control over their vocal
cords and the function.
So you can use Botox injections.
Then Botox injections came
along for use in the face,
and you read about this on page
six all the time;
it's hilarious.
But what they've also noticed
was that migraine headaches got
a lot better.
So you can use that,
you can use Botox to treat
migraine headaches.
And there actually are phase
III trials going on right now by
a colleague of mine down in
Manhattan, looking at exactly
that question.
So yeah, you can use them for
-- and you can take advantage of
some of these side-effects.
But I don't know of any
specific negative side-effects
that were used.
But that just happened.
You may see some beneficial
positive side-effects that the
pharma companies didn't even
know existed;
they didn't even target that.
So we continue -- so that's
where it's important to do
clinical trials,
as a clinician.
So I'm involved in clinical
trials as well.
And that's sort of an ongoing
duty I think,
certainly being an academic
institution, that we need to
also play an important role.
Okay? Thanks.
Prof: So if you have a
few more questions,
come on up.
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
Yeah.
Prof: I'm sure you have
to get back to your practice.
But the time's up now,
and thanks again Dr. Duffey.
Dr. Dianne Duffey:
My pleasure.
Thank you.
>